ietro Edwards, the Venetian Delegate for the Selection of Fine Art Objects for the Crown, wrote, on 8 April 1808, to the Napoleonic administration in Venice that he had finally completed his list of over 7,000 paintings. Two years before, following the entry of Emperor Napoleon I’s troops into the city, he had been set the almost impossible task of cataloguing every public picture in Venice. Some would be sent to the galleries of the Empire, others would be destined for the art market.

The Catholic Edwards family had emigrated from Britain to the Marche region of Italy, then part of the Papal States, because of the persecution of ‘Papists’ in the aftermath of the Glorious Revolution of 1688. In Britain, the overtly Catholic James II had been deposed and replaced by his Protestant daughter Mary II and her Dutch husband William III. The Edwards chose to settle in Loreto, one of the most popular sites of Marian pilgrimage, in order to be able freely to practise their faith.

Pietro was born there in 1744, but the family moved to Venice during the early 1750s. At the time, the lagoon city had been the capital of the Most Serene Republic for over a millennium, ruling over territories spanning the entire north-east of the Italian peninsula, as well as an overseas empire along the Adriatic Sea.

After studying at the Patriarchal Seminary, Pietro Edwards joined the workshop of the artist Gaspare Diziani, where he learned restoration techniques and developed a lifelong love of the Venetian school of painting. He quickly rose to fame because of his innovative restorations and, in 1778, the Venetian Senate entrusted him with the role of Official Keeper of the Public Pictures of Venice. In this capacity, he cleaned and repaired the paintings of the Great Council Hall in the Ducal Palace, among many others. Edwards’ workshop by the Church of Santi Giovanni e Paolo became an attraction for visitors to the city, impressing Johann Wolfgang von Goethe in 1790, one year after the start of the French Revolution.

Venice becomes French
Seven years later, Edwards, who was at the height of his career, experienced first hand the total upheaval brought to Venice by the arrival of the Revolution. On 12 May 1797, the Doge and Great Council abdicated in the face of the invading French Armée d’Italie commanded by Napoleon Bonaparte, who had conquered the north of Italy from west to east in a campaign aimed at Austria during the War of the First Coalition. The Venetian Republic thus ceased to exist.

A Provisional Municipality, a popular government based on the model of the French Directory, was set up and cannons were placed on the Rialto bridge in order to contain violent demonstrations by a populace angry at its leaders for having gone down without a fight. The turmoil and violence, however, were short-lived. On 17 May, 7,000 French soldiers entered the city.

Under the occupying military’s watchful eye, the first weeks of the Municipality were characterised by a hopeful idealism instilled by a well-functioning propaganda machine: the new government officially thanked Bonaparte for having ‘liberated’ the people of Venice in the name of the Revolution and its principles of liberty, equality and fraternity. The French Revolutionary Calendar was adopted and any physical reminders of the Serenissima, namely public depictions of the Lion of Saint Mark and former doges, were destroyed. The most famous of these was a sculpted relief panel by Bartolomeo Bon, depicting Doge Francesco Foscari kneeling in front of the winged lion above the gate of the so-called Porta della Carta (1438-42). The Renaissance sculptures were eventually replaced with a copy by Luigi Ferrari in 1885.